back in the bad old days wine drinkers
were forced to decant much of the wine
they purchased as a bottle may contain
not only one but an assortment of gross
solids in the form of crusts crystals
and other foreign bodies today even
small-scale winemakers have access to
filtration equipment and techniques that
ensure a clear bright wine and cider in
every bottle but in storage even
filtered wine particularly when stored
at low temperatures in cellars fridges
or cold rooms can spontaneously produce
crusts and deposits in the base of the
bottle this is usually the result of the
precipitation of crystals of the
naturally occurring tartaric acid as its
solution and the wine becomes
supersaturated it's particularly a
problem in white wines and roses as they
are stored and served cold the answer to
this problem is too cold stabilize the
wine before its bottle this is achieved
by calling the wine in a cold room
fridge or with a vet cooling system if
the wine is likely to be stored to say
at four degrees centigrade in the
domestic fridge or a restaurant cold
room then that is the temperature the
wine should be dropped to the wine
should be held at or below that
temperature for some days to allow for
crystallization to occur and then it's
filtered to remove floating crystals
before being returned to room
temperature the process can be speeded
up by stirring fine crystals of cream of
tarter into the wine when it's been
chilled in this particular case we used
point one of a gram of cream of tarter
per liter of wine and stored the wine at
two degrees centigrade in a cold room
for four days the tiny crystals act as
seeds around which larger crystals grow
some floating some attaching to the
sides of the vessel and some settling on
the bottom the wine is then pumped
through a filter as it leaves the vessel
in the cold room leaving much of the
tart rate behind in the vessel and
capturing a small proportion in the
filter in this particular case the wine
passes first through a 5 micron filter
which catches the bulk of the crystals
and the
oh one micron cartridge it can now be
bottled safe in the knowledge that you
won't end up with an unsightly crustal
crystals in your otherwise curved line